From the summer of 2019 to winter 2020, I worked on a computational genetics project with Dr. Ayoub by analyzing how spider silk gene expression fluctuates based on diet. I generated new box plots for the Miller et al paper that got rejected. One of the difficulties I faced was trying to generate graphs that included outliers, because the outliers were so far from the rest of the data, which shrinked the box plots so much that the graph is no longer readable. To avoid this, I had to split the y axis so we can remove the empty space between outliers and box plots. There were no templates for making such a plot, so I had to get creative, look at other codes online, and combine them to make my customized plot. I was also tasked with labeling important data points, which is easy to do on paper but tough to implement aesthetically in Python. The complexity of writing new programs to analyze large batches of data challenged me, but I persevered through all the errors. It really was a test of patience, but in the end, I was glad that I fixed all the bugs and made really good plots that end up being published on pLOS ONE. My role in that paper also included running statistical tests that I was not familiar with. I was scared to approach them at first, but I figured out how they work by self-studying online. The tasks I was given allowed me to learn things on my own, which is an important skill as I attempt to uncover more knowledge that no one has studied before. I became more proficient on rigorously analyzing experimental results, which has helped me perform the computational jobs in my Stanford project and will be useful in my future career. This experience broadened my data analysis skills and furthered my understanding of genetics, which can be applied to humans as personalized therapeutics are becoming a reality. 

