Charge-Altering Releasable Transporters (CART) are a new family of gene delivery vectors recently discovered in the Waymouth lab at Stanford University. These delivery vehicles are a class of synthetic cationic oligomers that form electrostatic complexes with mRNA and are designed to degrade to neutral, small molecules with time, resulting in the intracellular release and expression of mRNA. Although CARTs have been shown to transfect cells effectively, we want to further increase their efficiency and tissue type specificity so they can be developed into highly target-specific drugs. The Waymouth lab is currently using neural networks and non-convex optimization algorithms to help solve this problem, learning relationships between chemical structure and biological function to recommend new CART structures that may improve transfection efficiency and cell-type selectivity. In parallel, the Waymouth lab has developed simple calculations to estimate what fractions of the volume of a CART-mRNA nanoparticle are composed of water, mRNA, as well as the CART oligomers’ hydrophobic and cationic components. These estimated volume fractions vary based on nanoparticle formulation conditions and the identity of the CART oligomers in the particle. While estimates, these calculations are a helpful way of conceptualizing how CARTs’ chemical structure affects CART-mRNA nanoparticles’ physical properties and biological function.

For the summer of 2021, I investigated the volume fractions and composition of CART-mRNA nanoparticles that are known to be effective at transfecting cells to guide the process of discovering optimal CARTs. I also improved the dimensionality reduction and clustering workflow to help reduce the number of experiments needed to test the neural networks’ predicted CART mixtures. Throughout the summer, I worked closely with Dr. Waymouth and Isaac Applebaum. It was a great experience seeing how they think and tackle these challenging questions. I felt very rewarded as I revisted some python skills on function-writing and learning new techniques such as t-SNE and k-means. These complex concepts made a lot more sense to me as I manipulated the data with them and deciphered what the results meant. In the end, I was able to convert a long jupyter notebook of code that I collaborated with Isaac into a user-friendly spreadsheet. This spreadsheet can be used by anyone who do not have any coding experience. This process forced me to consider the user interface aspect of programming. I was surprised by how much coding I was able to simplify using a different application.

This project contributed significantly to my knowledge and experience by providing an opportunity to engage with faculty and students at Stanford on a project at the cutting edge of chemistry. I improved upon the coding and data analysis skills that I gained from doing research with Dr. Ayoub at W&L. I also learned some basic machine learning algorithms while clustering the data set, all of which are important computational skills for my future endeavors as a healthcare professional conducting clinical research. I am grateful that I was able to carry out this summer project remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, having the support to work with the Waymouth group prepared me to tackle more challenges in medical research. 
