In the gene expression group project, my teammates and I did exploratory data analysis first, shared our findings, then we merged our ideas and came up with a plan. However, during the group work, we changed our approach as we discover more effective ways to represent data, one such example is the heatmap.
The project challenged us to look for complex pathways of interactions between the genes, search for relevant literature, and use previous studies to help us understand how the genes relate to each other biologically.
We analyzed datasets containing the log2 fold-change for mRNA of approximately 30,000 genes sampled from the hypothalamus were provided by Dr. Toporikova and Dr. Blythe. Fold-change was calculated across all levels of interaction between control and high-fat high-sugar (HFHS) diets and ovariectomized and estrogenized rats. A minimum fold-change threshold of greater than 2 or less than -2 as well as a minimum probability threshold of 0.75 were chosen to narrow our list of candidate genes in consultation with Dr. Blythe. This threshold provided us with 9 candidate genes: 3 that were significantly affected by both diet and estrogen and 6 that were affected by just one or the other. Our analysis demonstrated that while both estrogen and diet cause differential expression of prolactin, diet is the more important factor. However, estrogen plays a more prominent role for regulating TSH-β.
Through this project, I learned how data exploration works for solving problems in a real world setting and how to be creative about making connections between different data representations and findings. It was a good experience working with a group of students, each with different interests and ideas that helped make our final analysis well-rounded. The heatmap code I generated was later used in my Stanford computational project as well, where I used them to find patterns among different formulations of CART polymers. I also plan on further exploring the data set in this project for my portfolio and learn more data analysis skills.
